Welcome to Supervised Learning with KNN.
After watching this video, you'll be able
to explain what K-Nearest Neighbors, or KNN,
is, describe how a K-NN algorithm works,
and discuss how K affects the outcome of the K-NN algorithm
K-Nearest Neighbors, or KNN, is a supervised
machine learning algorithm that takes a group
of labeled data points and then uses them to
learn to label other data points.
K-NN is used for both classification and regression.
In K-NN, data points near each other are
said to be neighbors based on the paradigm.
Points close to each other should have similar
features, and therefore, tend to be like each other
Let's consider this chart.
Here, for each queried data point, K-NN finds
its nearest data points and makes a prediction
based on the known target labels of the queried
point's neighbors.
You also need to define mathematically what is
meant by a neighbor.
Let's understand how K-NN works.
In a classification problem, K-NN works as follows.
First, pick a value for k.
Then, calculate the distance from each unlabeled
query point to all labeled cases in the training
data.
Search for the k observations in the training
data that are nearest to the query point.
Predict the value of the given data point using
the most popular class value from the
k-nearest neighbors.
In the case of regression, you would predict
using the average or median of target values.
Let's see how you can calculate the similarity
between two data points in classification.
Let's consider this dataset comprising 50
samples each from the three species of iris
– Iris setosa, Iris virginica, and Iris versicolor.
Each row in the dataset contains four features
listed in centimeters – sepal length, sepal
width, petal length, and petal width.
We want to use this dataset to train K-NN to
classify the four iris types.
Here is a scatterplot of the iris flower data
between two features – sepal length and
petal length.
The points are the sepal-petal length pairs
labeled with their actual iris type – setosa,
versicolor, or virginica.
Now, consider the region bound by the box and
the point at the center of the red circle.
Its three nearest neighbors are indicated by
the line segments connecting to them.
Using a majority vote, K-NN would correctly
classify this point as blue, or virginica.
Looking at another point, showing its nearest
three neighbors, you can see that the majority
class is green, or versicolor.
Thus, K-NN would incorrectly classify this iris.
Illustrated here is the decision boundary
for the K-NN classification result using K
equals 3 nearest neighbors and two input
features – sepal length and petal length.
The model was generated with the K-Neighbors
classifier from Scikit-Learn.
The three different colored regions indicate
which of the three classes or types of irises
K-NN predicted for each pair of sepal and petal lengths.
The points are the sepal-petal length pairs
labeled with their actual iris type – setosa,
versicolor, or virginica.
As you can see, K-NN correctly classified
most of the irises with an accuracy of 93%.
To find an optimal value for K, you can test
a range of values using a labeled test dataset
and measure accuracy.
Once you've done so, choose K equals 1, use
the training part for modeling, and calculate
the prediction accuracy using all samples in
your test set.
Repeat this process, increasing the K, and
see which K is best for your model.
For example, K equals 4 will give you the
best accuracy in this case.
The K-NN algorithm is a lazy learner, so it
doesn't learn in the sense that other machine
learning models do.
It stores the training data and makes predictions
for each query point based on its distances
to all points in the training data.
Thus, it is still a supervised model because
it must calculate all distances from each
query point to the training points, then sort
the observations by increasing distance, and
finally, select the top K observations.
Now, how does K affect the outcome of the K-NN algorithm?
If K is small, the values assigned to unlabeled
observations will tend to fluctuate, causing
overfitting.
If K is large, then K-N will smooth out the
finer details and cause underfitting.
Somewhere in between, there will be a happy
medium value for K.
In classification, the majority voting algorithm
becomes unreliable when the class distribution
is skewed.
More frequent classes tend to dominate the
prediction of the new example because they
are more prevalent among the nearest neighbors
owing to their higher number.
To overcome this challenge, you can weigh the
classification by considering the distance
from the test point to each of its K-NN.
When features have large values, they will
dominate the distance measure and the predictions.
Artificially more important features can cause
biased or low-accuracy predictions.
Features need to be scaled to remove this effect,
and the simplest way is standardization.
Including an irrelevant feature is like adding noise.
Noisy data requires a higher value of K to avoid
overfitting, which in turn drives up
computational cost and diminishes accuracy.
Keeping only relevant features lowers the
optimal K and improves both accuracy and computational
efficiency.
Features must be relevant to the problem.
Redundant features add computational cost
with no expected improvement in accuracy.
Being able to identify relevant features
comes from domain knowledge.
To check whether an independent feature is
important, you can tune K with and without
the feature and evaluate the change in model performance.
In this video, you learned that K-NN is a
supervised machine learning algorithm that
uses labeled points to learn how to label other points.
K-NN is used for classification and regression.
To find an optimal value for K, you can test a
range of values using a labeled test dataset
and measure accuracy.
When the class distribution is skewed, there is
a disadvantage in the basic majority voting
classification.
A possible resolution can be to weigh the
classification or by abstraction in data representation.
Keeping only relevant features lowers the
optimal K and improves both accuracy and computational
efficiency.
To check whether an independent feature is
important, you can tune K with and without
the feature and evaluate the change in model performance.